Making plans for pets during disasters:
The same goes for pets as it does for your family, having a plan will make everyone safe. So get those emergency kits and “just-in-case” plans ready for this year. 
We have given a general check list to help create a general disaster plan.

1.	Get ready now
a.	ID your pet – make sure all tags on your pet are up to date and maybe one or two additional address tags of people you trust in case you are out of town.
b.	Disaster kit – this is to make any time away from home as comfortable as possible without too much stuff. 
i.	Food for five days
ii.	Medications and medical records
iii.	Litter box or waste bags
iv.	Leashes, carriers
v.	Current photo and description
1.	In case you get separated from your pet after evacuating.
vi.	Beds, toys, misc.
vii.	Information on feeding schedules, medical problems, behavior issues, name and number of your vet.
1.	In case you have to take them to a shelter
viii.	Grooming items and other cleaning products
2.	If you leave, take your pet
a.	If it is not safe for your family, you cannot leave your pet. 
i.	Your pets are family, so why would you leave them where they could be in danger.
b.	Leave early – Do not wait for an evacuation notice. If you do not feel safe pack up and leave. Most cases of people that wait to have officials help them evacuate have to leave their pets behind.  
3.	If you stay home, be safe about it
a.	Close or block unsafe nooks or crannies – scared cats will hid and may not be able to get out in an emergency
b.	Move dangerous items
c.	Bring pets inside if weather conditions get bad
d.	Make a “safe room”- this is where you store supplies and is safer then the rest of the house.
i.	If there are windows board them up with cardboard or wood.
ii.	Take all dangerous objects out of the room.
e.	Listen to the radio for when conditions clear
4.	After Disaster
a.	Don’t let pets run loose – Pets can become confused and or lost because surroundings maybe unfamiliar from damages. 
b.	Check for damages – Pets could escape from damages to house or fence
c.	Be patient with pets – It will take time to get them to their normal routines again. There maybe a few problems so just work with them till there better.
d.	If flooding has occurred check the area for wild animals- Wildlife may have taken refuge in your area during a storm and could pose a serious problem to you and your pets.
5.	Everyday emergencies
a.	 Cannot get home – Have neighbors or family that can come and check on your pet in case you are unable to get home.
b.	Heat wave – Have shaded areas for pets you live outside in case of increased heat, or a pet door so they can come inside if you are too busy to let them in. 
